---
sidebar_position: 2
toc_max_heading_level: 2
---

# Xomega.Net for VS 2022

Below is a summary of the release notes for the *Xomega.Net for Visual Studio 2022* releases.

## Version 9.13.1

Release Date: 8/31/2025

### New features

- **Panels and tabs layout for details Blazor views.**
  - Support for defining [named field groups](../../visual-studio/modeling/presentation#ui-field-groups) for UI panels or tabs.
  - Configuration of [panels and tabs](../../visual-studio/modeling/presentation#panel-and-tab-layout) to lay out data object field groups and child objects.
  - Ability to specify a [field group for displaying links](../../visual-studio/modeling/presentation#object-links-to-views).
  - Configuration of [localizable titles for panels](../../visual-studio/modeling/presentation#panel-layout) and [tabs](../../visual-studio/modeling/presentation#tabs-layout).
- **UI security enhancements.**
  - Configuration of [panels and tabs with conditional visibility](../../visual-studio/modeling/presentation#conditional-panel-visibility).
  - Authorization policy specification for [main menu links](../../visual-studio/modeling/presentation#security-policy-for-main-menu-links).
  - Support for [conditional authorization policies](../../visual-studio/modeling/presentation#conditional-security-policy) in Blazor views.
- **Support for custom joins in generated service code for `read list` operations.**

### Minor changes
- Added handling of link results from saving a child details view.
- Generated Syncfusion Blazor views now use `SfTab` for tabs.
- Generated data properties are now set as `Required` based on service input parameters first.
- Improved custom code for unknown parameters in generated service CRUD operations.
- Removed deprecated `child-panels` element, replaced by the new `panel-layout` element.

### Bug fixes
- Fixed rerunning of the [Full CRUD with Views generator](../../generators/model/crud#running-the-generator) for `rest:method` and `xfk:add-child`.
- Fixed [Xomega Data Objects generator](../../generators/presentation/common/data-objects) for read-only properties without inputType.
- Fixed error in `f:override-delete` for certain cases.
- Using Xomega Framework 4.4.1 with several [enhancements and bug fixes](https://github.com/Xomega-Net/XomegaFramework/releases/tag/v4.4.1).

## Version 9.13.0

Release Date: 4/30/2025

### New features

- **New and redesigned criteria framework.**
  - Simplified defining [search criteria in the model](../../visual-studio/modeling/services#filter-criteria) and [services](../../framework/services/querying#criteria-dto) to provide just the field without operators, etc.
  - Enabled creating powerful search screens with lots of criteria by allowing [adding criteria dynamically](../../framework/blazor/components#criteriaedit).
  - Improved UX for [displaying selected criteria](../../framework/blazor/components#criteriadisplay) and [showing applied criteria](../../framework/blazor/components#criteriabar).
- **Support for server-side paging and sorting.**
  - Added support for server-side paging and sorting in generated [services](../../framework/services/querying#sorting-limiting-and-paging).
  - Updated [client-side list object](../../framework/common-ui/data-lists#sorting-and-paging) to support server-side paging and sorting.
  - Added [paging mode configuration in the model](../../visual-studio/modeling/services#paging-configuration).
- **Support for querying large data sets.**
  - Added [limiting the number of records](../../framework/services/querying#limiting-results) returned by the server to avoid performance issues.
  - Allowed configuring the maximum number of records returned by operation [in the model](../../visual-studio/modeling/services#configuring-result-limiting) or in the custom code.
  - Added display of a [warning message](../../framework/blazor/components#errors) when results have been limited, including both the total and returned numbers.
- **Model enhancements to control main menu items.**
  - Added ability to define [main menu links](../../visual-studio/modeling/presentation#main-menu-links) in the model on top-level views, including [configuring auto-search](../../visual-studio/modeling/presentation#opening-views-with-auto-search) and other initialization parameters.
  - Added ability to generate main menu links when [adding CRUD operations with views](../../generators/model/crud#searchdetails-views) to the model.
  - Removed the `child` attribute from the `ui:view` element in the model, as it is no longer needed.

### Minor changes
- Refactored grid paging to use new [data list object paging and sorting](../../framework/common-ui/data-lists#sorting-and-paging) framework for both server and client-side paging.
- Added `base operators` enum with all properties for ease of defining new enums, and made the `operators` enum inherit from it.
- Updated [Enumeration Data XML generator](../../generators/enums/enum-xml) to exclude abstract enums.
- Added generated `DbContext` constructor with non-generic options to allow defining a custom subclass for `DbContext`.


### Bug fixes
- Fixes for the generated solution when the `Authentication` option is set to `None`.
- Fixed [Label Resources generator](../../generators/presentation/common/resources#static-enumerations) to use enum inheritance for enum labels.
- Added Syncfusion control for `guid` types.
- Added namespaces for controls in generated Syncfusion views.
- Fixed generated Blazor search views for when there are no criteria defined.
- Added client-side sorting in data list objects when populating the data.

## Version 9.12.5

Release Date: 1/8/2025

### New features

- **Support for Authentication options in solution wizard.**
  - Added [*Authentication* selection](../../visual-studio/new-projects/new-solutions#selecting-solution-components) to the solution wizard with [`Password (Custom)`](../../visual-studio/new-projects/new-solutions#password-custom) option for the current security setup.
  - Added support for [`ASP.NET Core Identity`](../../visual-studio/new-projects/new-solutions#aspnet-core-identity) authentication option to all projects for EFCore, EF6 and PostgreSQL.
    - Added `SecurityStamp` to claims for the user's identity, and used it for refresh token validation.
  - Added authentication option [`None`](../../visual-studio/new-projects/new-solutions#none) to create all solution projects without any authentication/authorization.

### Minor changes

- DB context registration for Npgsql (PostgreSQL) now uses a new method for connection string.
- Updated NuGet packages for ASP.NET and WCF projects to avoid ones with vulnerabilities.
- Updated EntityFramework 6 version to the latest 6.5.1.

### Bug fixes

- Added [`efCoreVer` config](../../generators/data/entities#model-configuration) to allow generating entities for legacy EF Core for .NET Standard 2.0 (e.g. versions 2.1-3.1).
- Fixed support for selecting Blazor Server and a standalone WebAssembly in the same solution, which moves [setting of interactive render mode](../../tutorial/basic/run#interactive-render-modes) to the `Program.cs` now.
- Fixed [EF Domain Objects](../../generators/data/entities) generator to use generic `DbContextOptions` for the entities DB context.


## Version 9.12.4

Release Date: 12/18/2024

### New features

- **Support for MAUI Blazor Hybrid.**
  - Added MAUI Blazor Hybrid project selection to the [*Xomega Solution Wizard*](../../visual-studio/new-projects/new-solutions#selecting-solution-components).
  - Added ability to create MAUI Blazor Hybrid projects with a REST API backend.
  - Added ability to create 2-Tier MAUI Blazor Hybrid projects that connect to the database directly.

- **Support for .NET 9 in addition to .NET 8.**
  - Added framework selection for .NET version to the [solution wizard](../../visual-studio/new-projects/new-solutions#selecting-solution-components).
  - Defaulted framework to .NET 9, if it's installed. Otherwise, framework is set to .NET 8.
  - Based on the selected framework, project templates use target framework and the latest packages for `net9.0` or `net8.0` respectively.

### Minor changes

- Moved the title of the *Xomega Solution Wizard* to the window title for more room in the window.
- Made *Xomega Solution Wizard* configuration fields use default (smaller) font size and cleaned up margins.
- Refactored `LoginViewModel` and `TokenService` in projects using REST API based on the new [Xomega Framework 4.3.1](https://github.com/Xomega-Net/XomegaFramework/releases/tag/v4.3.1).
- Updated versions of referenced NuGet packages to avoid packages with vulnerabilities.

### Bug fixes

- Fixed default JWT config in `appsettings.json` for the REST API to work around issues in .NET 9.

## Version 9.12.3

Release Date: 09/26/2024

### Minor changes

- Added PostgreSQL type configs for enumeration types.
- Updated selection for the `name` on `sql:type` to show all currently used SQL types, and not just hardcoded SQL Server types.
- Updated project templates to use the latest ASP.NET nuget packages.

### Bug fixes

- Fixed key update in [Read Enum Operation](../../generators/model/crud.md#read-enum-operation) generator for PostgreSQL.
- Updated [Import from Database](../../generators/model/import) generator to include `db` attribute for `sql:type` configs of the added types.

## Version 9.12.2

Release Date: 06/30/2024

### New features

- **Support for PostgreSQL database.**
  - Added [`Database` selection](../../visual-studio/new-projects/new-solutions#reviewing-solution-configuration) with SQL Server and PostgreSQL options to the solution wizard under the `Service Implementations` project.
  - Updated project templates to support PostgreSQL for EF Core only.
  - Added PostgreSQL specific types and type configs to the model project as needed.
  - Added support for importing PostgreSQL enums and domain types.
  - Added ability to specify Postgres type (`pg-type`) for a SQL type config and import it from the DB for enums and domain types.
  - Updated [Database Schema](../../generators/data/schema) and [Database Change Script](../../generators/data/migration) generators to support PostgreSQL.

- **[Standard VS connection dialog](../../visual-studio/model-project/configuring-generators#configuring-connection-info)** is now used instead of the custom OLE DB connection dialog.
  - Command timeout is now specified in the connection string properties.
  - [Resetting connection info](../../visual-studio/model-project/configuring-generators#resetting-connection-info) is now done via a selection in a new `DB Provider` property.
  - The new connection dialog also allows working with SQL Server Express now.
  - Note: using standard VS connection dialog *removed ability to exclude tables to import* for now.

- **Support for [list types](../../visual-studio/modeling/types#list-types)**, backed by multi-database support of arrays in EF Core 8.x.
  - Type's `xfk:property` can be now configured as `multi-value` for array-based logical types.

### Minor changes

- DB connection string stored in the model project is now encrypted for security.
- `CamelCase`, `lower_case` and `UPPER_CASE` have been renamed in generators' properties to `PascalCase`, `lower_snake` and `UPPER_SNAKE` respectively.
- Configuration of cascade delete/update actions now includes the [`restrict` value](../../visual-studio/modeling/domain#foreign-key-configuration).
- SQL Server types and configs are now in separate model files that are excluded for non-SQL Server databases.
- [Database Schema](../../generators/data/schema#generator-parameters) and [Database Change Script](../../generators/data/migration#generator-parameters) generators now have a `Rerunnable` parameter to allow controlling wether the generated scrips are rerunnable. The new parameter is set to `false` by default for cleaner scripts.
- [Database Change Script](../../generators/data/migration) has been refactored to simplify generated scripts.
- Updated [Import from Database](../../generators/model/import) generator to handle FKs with different types than the referenced PKs.
- Excluded `edm_config.xom` if *Model.Diagrams* project is not selected in the new solution wizard.
- Excluded user controls in `global_config.xom` if *Client.Web* project is not selected in the new solution wizard.

### Bug fixes

- Fixed generators to allow using `sql:type` specified in the `type-config` elements.
- Fixed the issue with needing to open .xom files twice initially to get the Xomega editor.
- Fixed text of the grouping `NavMenu` for views defined without a module by using "Views" as the default resource.
- Fixed [Import from Database](../../generators/model/import) generator to not use a serial key on a subobject with a PK that includes parent keys.

## Version 9.12.1

Release Date: 03/27/2024

### New features
- Added support for **Entity Model Diagrams** as a separate project in a new solution.
- Updated [Entity Data Model generator](../../generators/data/edm) to clean up no longer valid entities and associations on the diagrams.

### Minor changes
- Added ability to [specify triggers](../../visual-studio/modeling/domain#object-configuration) under a `sql:table` config element in the model.
- Updated [EF Domain Objects generator](../../generators/data/entities) to configure entity table with triggers.
- Updated [Import from Database generator](../../generators/model/import) to import triggers from the database.

### Bug fixes

- Fixed [Import from Database generator](../../generators/model/import) to use generic types only (thus avoiding using the "user name" type as the base type).
- Fixed template for the `Model` project to exclude type configs that are not relevant to the selected solution configuration.
- Fixed project template for the `Client.Blazor.Wasm` project to use case-insensitive XML cache loader.

## Version 9.12.0

Release Date: 02/29/2024

### New features

- **Blazor moved to .NET 8 with support for various architectures.**
  - New Blazor solutions require .NET 8 now and are not backward compatible with previous .NET versions.
  - Xomega Solution wizard allows picking any Blazor architecture with different interactive render modes.
  - The main Blazor ASP.NET Core project allows enabling Blazor Server, hosted WebAssembly, or both with `Auto` mode.
  - The main Blazor project allows hosting REST API for the WebAssembly instead of running it as a separate project.
  - Blazor-hosted REST API uses a [path prefix](../../framework/services/api/rest#api-path-prefix) `api/` to not clash with Blazor view routes.
  - Blazor-hosted REST API for WebAssembly is secured with same-site cookie rather than JWT. 

- **New projects are now secured with a password login screen by default.**
  - New solution now includes an extensible model file `login.xom` in the Xomega model project.
  - `login.xom` is used to generate the `LoginView` with all the supporting objects and services.
  - New project also includes additional classes and customizations to support password login for the selected architectures.
  - The default password login implementation provides a 'Guest' login for ease of development.
  - Blazor `LoginView` is the same for Blazor Server and WebAssembly, despite different authentication mechanisms.
  - Blazor Server now allows to [revalidate authentication state](../../framework/services/security#revalidate) periodically.
  - REST API in the new solution implements either [cookie-based](../../framework/services/api/rest#cookie-authentication) or [JWT authentication](../../framework/services/api/rest#token-authentication), or both, as needed.
  - JWT authentication now provides support for [refresh tokens](../../framework/services/api/rest#refresh-tokens), in addition to short-lived access tokens.
  - Expired authentication now pops up a login screen for re-authentication.
  - Failed JWT token refresh will also display a ['Session expired'](../../framework/services/api/rest#client-jwt-authentication) warning on the login screen.
  - WPF apps with REST API use the new login view with JWT authentication.
  - WPF apps with WCF services now both use the new password `LoginView` and services by default.
  - TypeScript SPA apps use the new `LoginView` with JWT, but with no support for refresh tokens.
  - 2-tier WPF and legacy WebForms apps also use the new `LoginView` and services for password authentication.

- **Xomega model now allows you to specify an [authorization policy](../../visual-studio/modeling/presentation#security-policy) for each view.**
  - The specified authorization policy is automatically used on generated pages for Blazor views.
  - The specified policy is also used on the corresponding Blazor menu items of the generated main menu.

- **Cleaner projects' structures in the new solution.**
  - New solution now automatically sets up proper startup projects based on the selected configuration.
  - Projects in the new solution are now configured solely based on the selected configuration to reduce clutter.
  - There is no more conditional compilation code in the new projects, e.g. `EF6` vs `EFCore`.
  - The model project will now include only generators for the selected architectures.
  - Customization of the Blazor top menu is now performed in a separate class rather than the main `Program` class.
  - Defining Blazor authorization policies has been also moved from the main `Program` class to a separate class.
  - Configuring and securing REST API clients has been streamlined with the new [Xomega Framework 4.3.0](https://github.com/Xomega-Net/XomegaFramework/releases/tag/v4.3.0).

### Minor changes

- Updated dependencies of the new projects to the latest versions.
- Relaxed validation in the [Import from Database](../../generators/model/import#running-the-generator) generator to allow Xomega services without fields (e.g. `login.xom`).
- Added support for Bootstrap 5.3.2.
- [Syncfusion Blazor controls](../../framework/blazor/syncfusion/controls) now show validation errors under the control by default, rather than as a tooltip.
- Valid fields in [Xomega Blazor controls](../../framework/blazor/controls#specialized-input-types) no longer show a big green checkmark by default.
- Sidebar was updated to be toggled just by the Bootstrap, thus not requiring an interactive mode.
- Added default Blazor favicons.
- SPA project template now uses Nuget for TypeScript, instead of deprecated SDK.
- Added ability to mark an entire service as [not exposed for WCF](../../visual-studio/modeling/services#wcf-configuration) (e.g. login), updated WCF generators accordingly.
- Generators for WPF, SPA and WebForms views now use the [`field-cols`](../../visual-studio/modeling/presentation#panel-layout) config for the number of columns, rather than the legacy [`ui:layout`](../../visual-studio/modeling/presentation#legacy-layout-config) config.
- New solution wizard now checks for a Xomega license before creating a solution.

### Bug fixes

- Generated data objects now better handle reads without blank keys, when Blazor activates blank models initially.


## Version 9.11.8

Release Date: 11/13/2023

### Minor changes

- Updated the `Dictionary` item template to add REST endpoint, make some fields required, and default the module to "Admin".
- Updated  [`Data Objects`](../../generators/presentation/common/data-objects) generator to make properties of supplied keys required and only check input of non-read operations for required properties.

### Bug fixes

- Added null check for inner properties to the generated [`Cache Loaders`](../../generators/enums/cache-loaders).
- Fixed generated [`Service Implementations`](../../generators/services/service-impl) to use the right `AddClause` method for criteria without operators.

## Version 9.11.7

Release Date: 6/21/2023

### Minor changes

- Project templates now use Xomega Framework 4.2.1 with several [enhancements and bug fixes.](https://github.com/Xomega-Net/XomegaFramework/releases/tag/v4.2.1)
- Syncfusion resources are now loaded from the versioned Syncfusion package rather than from CDN to make upgrades easier.
- Updated the `Dictionary` item template to use `read enum` operation instead of `read`.
- Updated [`Data Objects`](../../generators/presentation/common/data-objects) generator to set `IsKey` on properties of objects with complex keys.
- Updated [`Model Operations`](../../generators/model/crud#read-list-operation) generator to generate `read list` criteria for object's keys, including composite keys.
- "*Trust Server Certificate*" parameter is now added to the [connection string](../../visual-studio/model-project/configuring-generators#database-parameters) for any SQL provider by default.
- NuGet packages on project templates were updated to the latest versions as appropriate.

### Bug fixes

- Xomega Framework 4.2.1 provides bug fixes for the Syncfusion grid version 21.2.9 and up.
- Fixed the [`Service Implementations`](../../generators/services/service-impl) generator for objects with complex keys.
- Fixed issue with loading Xomega Model projects in VS caused by unsupported default target framework v4.0.

## Version 9.11.6

Release Date: 1/14/2023

### New features

- Blazor and REST API project templates now target .NET 7 when it's installed.
- With .NET 7, the [generated Blazor pages](../../generators/presentation/blazor/views) now confirm unsaved changes when [navigating to another page or an external URL](../../framework/blazor/views#page-title-and-navigation-lock).
- The [generated Blazor pages](../../generators/presentation/blazor/views) now use the main view's title as the page title.
- Project templates now use Xomega Framework 4.2.0 with several [enhancements and bug fixes.](https://github.com/Xomega-Net/XomegaFramework/releases/tag/v4.2.0)
- In addition to a sidebar, the [`NavMenu`](../../framework/blazor/components#navmenu) component can be now displayed as a top-level drop-down menu.

### Bug fixes

- Xomega Framework 4.2.0 provides bug fixes for using Syncfusion Blazor controls ver. 20.3.0.47.

### Minor changes

- Startup code in the web project templates is simplified to use a single top-level `Program` class.
- Cleaned up the CSS files in the Blazor projects using CSS isolation.
- The generated context for the [EF Domain Objects](../../generators/data/entities) now uses lazy loading for EF6.
- Added "*Trust Server Certificate*" to the connection string as a workaround for expired `SQLNCLI11` driver.
- The target framework on legacy project templates was upgraded to `net472` from `net461`.
- NuGet packages on project templates were updated to the latest versions as appropriate.


## Version 9.11.5

Release Date: 9/25/2022

### New features
- Added support for [custom code in generated REST controllers](../../generators/services/web-api#customizing-the-output).
- Added support for [localization of static enumerations](../../visual-studio/modeling/static-data#localizing-static-items).
- Added support for [localization of dynamic enumerations](../../visual-studio/modeling/static-data#localizing-dynamic-items).
- Added model support for [custom enumeration names](../../visual-studio/modeling/types#custom-enumeration) that come from DB.
- Changed *Enumeration Read List* generator to [*Read Enum Operation*](../../generators/model/crud#read-enum-operation) to generate a separate `read enum` operation.
- Fixed support for `big int` type using a new [`BigIntegerProperty`](../../framework/common-ui/properties/standard#bigintegerproperty).

### Bug fixes
- Fixed compilation issue in generated Service Contracts due to enumeration name conflict.
- Fixed generators of Data Objects and View Models to handle `DataObjectList` classes with multiple `ReadList` operations.
- Fixed generation of navigation properties for fields in a key fieldset.
- Fixed service-based generators to handle objects with only subobject operations.
- Fixed message constant generators for VS 2022.
- Fixed `UnloadProject` and `ReloadProject` to execute in the UI thread for VS 2022 to avoid errors.

### Minor changes
- Added file nesting to the REST controllers project.
- Updated to the latest NuGet packages where possible.

## Version 9.11.4

Release Date: 3/14/2022

### New features
- Support for Visual Studio 2022
- Support for .NET 6

### Minor changes
- Fixed label resource generator to not output duplicate resources for data properties.
- Fixed solution template for creating 2-tier WPF apps.
- Updated to the latest NuGet packages where possible.
