---
sidebar_position: 1
toc_max_heading_level: 2
pagination_prev: null
---

# Xomega.Net for VS 2026

Below is a summary of the release notes for the *Xomega.Net for Visual Studio 2026* releases.

## Version 10.0.1

Release Date: 4/13/2026

### New features

- **Support for Visual Studio 2026 and .NET 10.**
  - Xomega.Net can now be installed in Visual Studio **2026** in addition to Visual Studio **2022**.
  - Targeting **.NET 10** is now available in Visual Studio 2026.
  - Xomega.Net can now be installed directly **from Visual Studio Marketplace** as a **VSIX** rather than separately as MSI.
  - Xomega **Solution template** was updated to use the **latest NuGet packages** for each target framework.

- **Xomega Model project converted to modern SDK-style.**
  - Updating to **newer versions** of generators and model structure made easy by simply updating the **SDK version** in the project file.
  - **Standard** file system **operations** (drag and drop, copy/paste, rename) to **organize model files in folders** in the model project.
  - Model **files are now automatically included** in the project based on the project's glob rules.
  - **Model file previews** are now available when selecting a model file in the Solution Explorer.
  - Model project file has now minimal content that can be easily **viewed and edited without unloading the project**.

- **Xomega generators are now configured in XML files rather than in the project file.**
  - Allows for better organized, more readable and more complex configurations of each generator.
  - **Schema validation and IntelliSense** support for generator configuration files.
  - Configuration **parameter descriptions and possible values** are now available from the schemas.
  - XML comments in configuration files help to understand the purpose of each generator and its parameters.
  - Decluttered project file helps with updates, as well as any diffs and merge conflicts.
  - Standard file system operations (drag and drop, copy/paste, rename) to **organize generators in folders** in the model project.
  - Generator configuration files are now **automatically included in the project** based on the project's glob rules.
  - Generator **configuration previews** are now available when selecting a generator file in the Solution Explorer.

- **Database connection handling improved and is more user-friendly.**
  - Database **connection dialog opens automatically** as needed when running generators that require database access.
  - New dialog **prompts for saving specified database connection** in the model project for future use and for startup projects.
  - Connection string is **saved as encrypted in the .user file** of the model project that can be excluded from source control.
  - Connection string for modern SDK-style startup projects is **saved in the user secrets file** excluded from source control.

- **Xomega customization on any level has been made extremely easy.**
  - **Customize Model Schemas** menu allows adding new model elements and attributes and customizing *Collapse To Definition* behavior.
  - **Customize Model Validation** menu allows adding new or customizing existing model validation rules and error messages.
  - **Customize Model IntelliSense** menu allows adding IntelliSense support and *Go To Definition* for custom model elements and attributes.
  - **Customize Model Symbol Browsing** menu allows customizing browsing of model elements in the Object Browser.
  - **Customize Generator Sources** menu allows customizing source code for selected generators and adding new generators.
  - **Customize Config Schemas** menu allows adding new configuration elements and attributes for new or existing generators. 

### Minor changes

- Model structure has been made more user-friendly by allowing **any order for most model element groups**.
- **Schema validation severities** for generator and model schemas **can now be configured** based on namespace patterns.
- Generator folders no longer have spaces in their names in the new solution, and generator config names now end with *.xgen*.
- Database connection dialog **no longer supports** Windows-specific **OLE DB and ODBC providers**, supporting only cross-platform `Microsoft.Data.SqlClient` and `Npgsql` providers.
- **Message constants** are now **automatically generated** from corresponding resource files, without having to select *Run Custom Tool* manually.
- **Word docx templates** for documentation generators are now included **in the model project** for easy customization for the current solution.
- **Sample custom SQL XML report** generator and template included in the project now list database tables and columns.
- **View License Agreement link** was added to the *Help > About Xomega* dialog.

### Bug fixes

- Fixed *Syncfusion Blazor Views* generator to remove old duplicate tabs template.
- Fixed constructor in generated custom service clients.
- Fixed cleanup of `read enum` operation in the *Full CRUD with Views* generator.
- Fixed `sqlsrv_types.xom` to exclude `HierarchyId` EF mapping for legacy apps (WebForms and WCF).
