---
sidebar_position: 2
toc_max_heading_level: 2
pagination_next: null
---

# Xomega.Net for VS 2017

Below is a summary of the release notes for the *Xomega.Net for Visual Studio 2017* releases.

## Version 7.9.1

Release Date: 4/9/2019

### Bug Fixes

- Fixed message generation text template for resources with no comments.
- Updated WPF/WCF project template to use messages from the resources.
- Fixed VS2017 detection issue during installation when VS2019 is also installed.

## Version 7.9.0

Release Date: 3/21/2019

### New Features

- Support for Entity Framework Core.
- Shared projects for services and view models migrated to .Net Core format.
- Project templates use EF Core, with legacy templates for EF6.x still available.
- NuGet packages installed from the default source rather than local drive.
- New solution is buildable without having to build the Model project first.
- Web API REST services migrated to Asp.Net Core with EF Core.
- Web API REST services use async services now, but sync services is still an option.
- Generation of extended partial entity classes for the custom code.
- Using the latest versions of the NuGet packages including for .Net Core.

### Bug Fixes

- Fixed generated cache loaders in both C# and TS to use the new Output result.
- Fixed use of multi-value criteria with nullable fields in the updated Xomega.Framework 2.1.1.

## Version 7.8.0

Release Date: 1/26/2019

### New Features

- Entity Framework classes generated now directly from model.
- Entity configurations by each entity using Fluent API.
- Framework to support operators for building queries.
- Standard operators for common data types.
- Dynamic operators for date ranges using relative dates.
- Dynamic operators for number ranges.
- Improved validation of entity existence.
- Improved validation of foreign keys.
- Validation of duplicate primary keys.
- Request validation of required fields, maximum length and enumerations.
- Error messages read from resources for globalization.
- Ability to override and translate text for message from referenced libraries.
- Use of request culture for date operations.
- Ability to return (warning/info) messages from services along with the results.
- Reported messages and errors displayed in a closable panel.
- Configuration of the messages panel layout.
- Using Xomega.Framework and XomegaJS 2.1.0 with support of the above features.
- Using the latest versions of the NuGet packages.

## Version 7.7.6

Release Date: 10/30/2018

### Bug Fixes

- Added better handling of connection string issues in DB Connection dialog.
- Added explicit handling to close DB Connection dialog when it's stuck.
- Refactored based enumeration types to not have sizes where not appropriate.
- Updated XomegaJS properties for some base enumeration types.
- Improved Enumeration Read List generator for `*int` key types.
- Made all known namespaces available to the document generators.
- Fixed generated implementation of Create operation with create keys.
- Updated data objects generation in C# and TS to make create keys editable for new objects only.
- Fixed SPA views to set proper parent parameters on links.
- Disabled JQuery AJAX cache in the default template to fix IE issues.
- Updated Xomega.Framework NuGet packages to version 2.0.1.

## Version 7.7.5

Release Date: 9/12/2018

### New Features

- Enhanced DB Import to allow customizing naming conventions for generated logical names.

### Bug Fixes

- Fixed DB Import to handle duplicate constraint names under different schemas.
- Fixed DB Import to not use size for `image`, `ntext` and `text` SQL types.
- Added proper logical base types configurations for remaining SQL types, fixed EDM types.
- Updated document template for Service Model design based on the current architectures.
- Minor updates to the Static Data design document template.

## Version 7.7.4

Release Date: 8/8/2018

### Bug Fixes

- Fixed generation of main menus in SPA and WPF apps to put menu options under Views menu for views with no named module.
- Fixed CRUD generators to not output empty category elements.
- Fixed CRUD generators to not output empty structures when the object has only key fields.

## Version 7.7.3

Release Date: 4/22/2018

### New Features

- Enhanced registration of cache loaders to exclude ones that require input.
- Updated generation of cache loaders for SPA to those with input only.
- Updated WPF projects configuration for easier support of SSL.
- Made SPA project use the latest TypeScript version to avoid popups.
- Updated nuget packages to the latest versions where applicable.

### Bug Fixes

- Fixed restoring saved (bookmarked) views in ASP.NET.
- Fixed an issue where custom code is removed due to different line ending.
- Turned off validation of the TS libraries to avoid errors with the Knockout in the TS > 2.3.

## Version 7.7.2

Release Date: 10/11/2017

### New Features

- Support for Visual Studio 2017.
- Support for SQL Server 2016 types.
- All features from version 6.7.1 for VS2015.

### Bug Fixes

- Removed empty DB connection string parameters, which are invalid in the EF connection.