---
sidebar_position: 1
toc_max_heading_level: 2
pagination_prev: null
---

# Xomega.Net for VS 2019

Below is a summary of the release notes for the *Xomega.Net for Visual Studio 2019* releases.

## Version 8.11.3

Release Date: 2/21/2022

### Bug fixes
- Fixed generators for the default dictionary object.
- Fixed service implementation generator for a generic service on an object with no fields.
- Fixed generator of custom classes for Web API controllers.
- Improved `f:bool` generator function to better handle errors.
- Fixed typos in schemas, template files and generators.

## Version 8.11.2

Release Date: 12/25/2021

### Minor changes

- *Rebuild* option for Model project no longer runs the *Clean*, requiring it to be run explicitly instead.
- Removed *Regenerate* option for generators to require explicit *Clean* instead.
- Improved default display of the *Not Authorized* view in the Blazor project templates.
- Removed `Search View Layout` and `Details View Layout` parameters from *Full CRUD with Views* generator.
- Renamed generators folder "ASP.NET" to "Web Forms".
- Moved *WCF Client Config* generator under "Presentation Layer/Common" folder.

### Bug Fixes

- Fixed Blazor Server template to not include Syncfusion links when not using Syncfusion controls.
- *Blazor Views* generators no longer output an empty tabs control, if details object has no children.
- Fixed typos in generator parameter descriptions and some generated comments.

## Version 8.11.1

Release Date: 7/23/2021

### Bug Fixes

- Fixed project templates for WebForms to target net461.
- Fixed Syncfusion Blazor Views generator to use proper `XSfGrid` configurations.

## Version 8.11.0

Release Date: 7/17/2021

### New Features

- Major revamp of the Blazor solution and views as follows.
- Updated all Blazor views and components to use Bootstrap 5 for style/layout.
- New and improved Xomega Framework Blazor controls, such as grid, auto-complete, HTML5 date/time picker and numeric input.
- Implemented main navigation menu and search criteria on list screens as sidebars.
- Implemented view structure and modal popups based on Bootstrap.
- Allowing fine-grained layout customization for each generated details view.
- Support for specifying grid column widths in the model.
- Property-bound action buttons for controlling their state from common code, including auto-computed state.
- Responsive design for dynamic views that depends on open inline views in addition to the screen size.
- Support for localization of all view elements, such as labels, titles and shortcuts.
- Generating views using Syncfusion Blazor components.
- Support for editable Syncfusion grid.

### Bug Fixes

- Updated description of internal NuGet project template to prevent from using it by mistake.

## Version 8.10.3

Release Date: 9/28/2020

### New Features

- Replaced a dozens of preconfigured Xomega project template with a single one for all Xomega solutions.
- Added ability to select any combination of projects/technologies for new Xomega solutions.
- Ability to customize project names and specify other project configurations when creating new Xomega solutions.
- Ability to update configurations of already created Xomega solutions by adding to it and configuring new projects/technologies.
- Updated project templates to the latest nuget packages.

### Bug Fixes

- Installation no longer offers custom feature selection to avoid missing files.

## Version 8.10.2

Release Date: 6/25/2020

### New Features

- Support for Blazor WebAssembly solutions and projects.
- Async setting of property values, change events, and lookup loading for running in the Mono Wasm runtime.
- Updated to Xomega Framework 3.1.0 and latest nuget packages.

## Version 8.10.1

Release Date: 5/28/2020

### Bug Fixes

- Blazor pager fix from the latest Xomega Framework 3.0.1.
- Fixed display of web PickList component in Edge.

## Version 8.10.0

Release Date: 4/29/2020

### New Features

- Blazor Server support.
- Support for async operations with cancellation tokens on both the client and server sides.
- Generation of REST service clients in C# that allows multi-tier client apps to use ASP.NET Core REST services.
- Minimized custom code required to implement contextual lookup tables.
- Support for dynamic view titles with modification indicators in view models.
- Localization support for common messages.
- Using Xomega.Framework 3.0.0 with support of the above features and other improvements and bug fixes.
- Upgrade to use the latest cross-platform WPF on .NET Core 3.1
- Allowing to create a custom window for generated WPF views.
- Project file for WPF and shared projects upgraded to .NET Core format, allowing to not have to add generated files to them, and to customize file nesting rules.
- Allow SPA apps to consume REST services that use System.Text.Json for serialization.

## Version 8.9.1

Release Date: 6/20/2019

### New Features

- Support for Visual Studio 2019.